title: "New home for the blog!"
date: 2011-10-07 17:00
tags: site
slug: new-home-for-blog

<div class='post'>
<h2>Why the new home?</h2><p>SilverStripe is great, but, like the rest of the platform, there's not much to it. This isn't bad in and of itself, I just don't have time to essentially build and maintain the workings of a blog. So, I've decided to basically outsource that aspect, so that I can focus on the content of my blog, and the core of my website (which, admittedly, has been sorely neglected).</p><!-- more --><h2>Why Blogger?</h2><p>I'm a hopeless Google addict, for starters. :)</p><p>Seriously, though, while that is part of the reason (more Google accounts than I can count, multiple Android devices...), I actually put a lot of thought into where I was going to host my blog. </p><p>I am familiar with many different blogging platforms. My private blog has been on LiveJournal for nearly 10 years, though I've technically left it for its cousin site, Dreamwidth (I say cousin, because it's a fork of the LiveJournal codebase), I've dabbled in Wordpress off and on over the years, and even had and account at HubPages for a time. They all have their pros and cons, and are all great in their own right, but Blogger had what I needed:</p><ul><li>Simple posting interface (give me a text field and I'm happy)</li><li>Option to use HTML directly</li><li>Option to monetize (I'm still debating whether I'll actually do it, but having the option lets me make that choice)</li><li>Code highlighting*</li><li>URL customization (ability to use own)</li><li>Style customization</li><li>Free options</li><li>Hosted</li><li>Threaded comments</li></ul><p>*None of the blogging platforms that I looked at actually have this built in, but thankfully, there are now services such as Gist that allow embedding code snippets in any blog, so while I need it, it ended up a lower priority than it would have otherwise been.</p><p>Most of the platforms that I looked at have most of these options, so it pretty much came down to what had the most, and perhaps any extra goodies (such as Blogger's mobile app, which is nifty, albeit a little rough around the edges).</p><br /></div>
